---
layout: blog
title: "Lessons from the 42 School Piscine"
---

Whenever I learn a new subject, the most difficult task is finding a way to put that subject into some kind of conceptual context. I’ve found that before I get interested in the “how” of a subject, I always need to know the “why.” I don’t like to tackle anything in a vacuum. There needs to be some sort of larger story into which I can fit the subject at hand that explains why that particular subject is important and how that subject interacts with other related concepts.

So "why" learn to program?

Prior to coming to the Piscine, I hadn’t answered the “why" question. Yes, I knew why I was interested in being a programmer (mainly the challenge of it and, of course, the opportunity to make more money than current my $15/hour job).  That isn’t the “why" question I’m addressing.

The real question to ask is, why is programming important in the first place?

As simple as the answer may be, the question is actually really important. Programming is not a subject to be learned in a vacuum. Beneath the fancy frameworks and software stacks that we take for granted today, there are high-level programming languages. Beneath these high-level programming languages, there are lower-level programming languages that the high-level languages are built upon. Beneath the lower-level languages, there is assembly language and machine code. Beneath that, there is a computer architecture and, even lower still, there is physical hardware. You get the idea.

The point is, all programming languages today trace their design and origin back to the physical constraints of the machines that run the code and the theories of computation that gave birth to the machines themselves. That is the context in which to ask the question, why is programming important?

P
