---
layout: post
title: "Thoughts on Education and Success"
category: Personal Essays
---

The beginning of adulthood is an abrupt reckoning for the half-truths and misconceptions of childhood. There are many beliefs we hold as children that are quickly ripped away from us as we step into the broader world outside of our shielded selfs. When confronted with the perverse realities of the unfamiliar world around us, we find things not exactly as we were told they were. Things are ever so slightly different. Life's edges are sharper. The ground is harder than we remember. Every fall and scrape carries a new pain that we didn't know existed. For some, this opening of reality is not as steep a drop. Some are the unfortunate children for whom life's brutality is an old acquaintance. Perhaps they are the ones more ready to face the harshness awaiting them. Others, like myself, are well-protected from the reality held outside the walls of childhood. For us, coming to terms with real life is a painful process.  

For most of my life, I was sheltered from the less desirable aspects of reality. As I look back, I see that most components of my life were convenient construals of reality designed to protect the fragility of my naive self. I was homeschooled until fifth grade, and although my parents loving gave their best efforts, my formative years were lived inside a bubble of my parents' making. There was no one outside of my small circle of other homeschooled kids, who thought differently, behaved differently, or believed contrary to what I was accustomed. There was no one to challenge my reality. No one introduced any kind of opportunity for painful questioning of my beliefs, so I grew up thinking the world was exactly as I was told it was. 

When I did come into contact with the real world, it was most often in the form of youth sports. However, just as in the homeschooled world, there are no losers in AYSO soccer or little league baseball. I started most games and was one of the best players on most teams. As in most small communities, there was not enough competition to prove anything other than that I was athletically gifted. Success came to be expected, and in the instances when I did fail, there were smiling parents eager to tell me that I really was good a shortstop and there wasn't any reason to be worried about a few missed ground balls. One embarrassing memory of the sort particularly sticks out. I was eleven years old and the best pitcher on my team. For some reason, on the last game of the season, I couldn't summon my usual command of the one fastball I had in my limited arsenal. One frantic wild pitch after another, I walked the other team's entire batting order in the very first inning, giving up four runs in the process. After the first nine batters, my confidence was entirely shot. I stood trembling on the mound, tears welling up in my eyes. I still vividly remember that feeling of embarrassment at my pitching abilities. I wasn't crying because the game was lost, I was crying because, for the first time in my life, my pitching abilities were called into question, and I was faced with the possibility that maybe I wasn't as good of pitcher as I thought I was. It was a painful encounter with failure, the type that called my perception of self into question and forced me to unwillingly face reality. Alone on the pitching mound, there was nowhere to hide. There being no escape, my insides welled up with pain until the end of the inning, three long outs and five more runs later. That memory sticks in my mind so vividly because instances of failure like that were few and far between during my youth sports career. 

The rest of my middle school years were no less insular. I attended a tiny private, Christian school through eighth grade. There, I quickly established myself as one of the smarter kids out of the twelve in my class. 